my farming philosophy, I carry it
on from my parents but the most natural way
is the best way, I'm a firm believer
in that and I think we run into a lot of
situations where people say well you have a sick
animal do you not treat it you just leave it to
pass and that's not the case our animals get
treated all equally the same whether they have
an antibiotic or they don't but we would like to
raise animals in a way that the stress is so low
the environment is healthy the feed is great
and and they're living off the land which
should decrease the level of stress and sickness
therefore creating a very natural product
so I would say our philosophy is a natural
organic way, yeah to give it yeah to give the
animals the best chance of a healthy life and
instead of using medicine as kind of a fallback
we're trying to avoid that at all costs, what often
comes up in family discussions with outsiders is
the fact we see ourselves as real animal lovers
and which is a bit of a contradiction in terms
of some people because they see us as being you
know because we're in the meat business therefore
we must have a very unique relationship with the
animals we raise but I would say we love animals
as much as anybody and we do pretty well all the
cattle work here on the farm is done on horseback
we've got dogs and cats as you've seen when you
arrived here, the pigs we really enjoy raising them
all summer long we just really enjoy being around
live animals so it's a it's interesting to think
that you're in the meat business and yet we
consider ourselves real animal lovers, yeah here
it's mostly angus but a lot of the herds you'll
see have a mix so Angus, herford is a big one
some charolais, simmental but we try to always
keep it at least 50% angus and that helps us
actually create a carcass that's pretty uniform
throughout all the brands so angus genetics is our
it's definitely the the main one, yeah for
sure. yeah grass-fed is as simple as it sounds
so through the summer months when the grass
is on the ground they're eating grass and
that's it I don't feed them anything other than
the summer months other than grass and then the
winter time throughout the summer months we are
cutting down pastures with grass and we store
it into the rounds mills you guys will see around
the property and it's essentially dried grass
so it's stored in a way that preserves
it for them to eat in the winter also known as hay
and that's what the grass that animals
would be eating in the winter months
so it's always a grass or a grass forage of
some sort, and the grain the grain-fed animals
primarily are barley depending on availability
and whatnot it might be corn sometimes but i'd say
barley makes up the bulk of that and then we'll
also feed them a lot of halage or silage which is
fermented grains that give us a little more
bang for our buck in terms of volume the
key thing when when we're finishing animals with
grain is to keep enough forage and roughage in
their diet so that they re they maintain their
the functionality of their rumen and still put
on fat which is really the purpose of finishing
anything with grain so we have a two month window
of calving and generally those animals will be
harvested approximately two years later now we're
in the meat business selling meat regularly so
we have to take a two-month window of calving
and have those animals finish in a much broader
so the larger steers tend to finish first and
the smaller heifers tend to finish last so that
kind of creates that expansion but we're generally
looking at about two years so if it's two yearssince the animal is born to when it's harvested
you factor in 10 months that the mother is
carrying the calf as a fetus you're almost three
years start to finish between when the mother cow
gets bred and her offspring ends up on someone's
plate so it's a considerable amount of investment
in time, our average heifer weight is about
1300 pounds 1250 to 1300 which is not uncommon
in the angus breed and our steers would be 14
to 1450 pounds live so the average carcass
weight is sitting right around 800 pounds
775 to 800 pounds is an optimum carcass size for
what we for cutting up and then serving as meatcuts
a steer is a castrated male that's not kept
for breeding purposes in which case it would be
a bull so all males are born as bulls what Lieschen
will do, well you can maybe explain how that's
done, yeah so we'll
castrate the bull calves we'll either do a
bit of both, sometimes we'll do it at the beginning
of when they're born right away so we'll
get a painkiller and we'll either cut or we'll
band I prefer to cut I find it more humane but
anyone would say anything, and then some
actually if they're born right away and I already
like their body size, their coloring or I think
there's potential especially with who I know the
cow is and the bull, I will keep them intact longer
and so now we have a couple still actually intact
and i've been judging them and come weaning
time i'll make the decision whether will i
keep them as a bull or will I cut them and
make them a steer and they'll get finished
and into the program and the reason we do that is
bulls tend to grow very large and temperamentally
can be a lot more unpredictable so that's one
thing we don't want to risk out in open fields
to have bulls around that aren't there for a
specific purpose for producing, heifers are females
all females are called heifers
until they've had their first calf
in which case they're commonly called a cow
so you have cows and bulls heifers and steers